README.md, before:

# Expound

Expound formats `clojure.spec` errors in a way that is optimized for humans to read.

Expound is in alpha while `clojure.spec` is in alpha.

## Usage

[![Clojars Project](https://img.shields.io/clojars/v/expound.svg)](https://clojars.org/expound)

Replace calls to `clojure.spec.alpha/explain` with `expound.alpha/expound` and to `clojure.spec.alpha/explain-str` with `expound.alpha/expound-str`.

```clojure
(require '[clojure.spec.alpha :as s])
;; for clojurescript:
;; (require '[cljs.spec.alpha :as s])
(require '[expound.alpha :as expound])

(s/def :example.place/city string?)
(s/def :example.place/state string?)
(s/def :example/place (s/keys :req-un [:example.place/city :example.place/state]))

(s/explain :example/place {})
;; val: {} fails spec: :example/place predicate: (contains? % :city)
;; val: {} fails spec: :example/place predicate: (contains? % :state)
;; :clojure.spec.alpha/spec  :example/place
;; :clojure.spec.alpha/value  {}

(expound/expound :example/place {})
;; -- Spec failed --------------------

;;   {}

;; should contain keys: `:city`,`:state`

;; -- Relevant specs -------

;; :example/place:
;;   (clojure.spec.alpha/keys
;;    :req-un
;;    [:example.place/city :example.place/state])

;; -------------------------
;; Detected 1 error

(s/explain :example/place {:city "Denver", :state :CO})
;; In: [:state] val: :CO fails spec: :example.place/state at: [:state] predicate: string?
;; :clojure.spec.alpha/spec  :example/place
;; :clojure.spec.alpha/value  {:city "Denver", :state :CO}

(expound/expound :example/place {:city "Denver", :state :CO})
;; -- Spec failed --------------------

;;   {:city ..., :state :CO}
;;                      ^^^

;; should satisfy

;;   string?

;; -- Relevant specs -------

;; :example.place/state:
;;   clojure.core/string?
;; :example/place:
;;   (clojure.spec.alpha/keys
;;    :req-un
;;    [:example.place/city :example.place/state])

;; -------------------------
;; Detected 1 error
```

## Prior Art

* Error messages in [Elm](http://elm-lang.org/), in particular the [error messages catalog](https://github.com/elm-lang/error-message-catalog)
* Error messages in [Figwheel](https://github.com/bhauman/lein-figwheel), in particular the config error messages generated from [strictly-specking](https://github.com/bhauman/strictly-specking)
* [Clojure Error Message Catalog](https://github.com/yogthos/clojure-error-message-catalog)
* [The Usability of beginner-oriented Clojure error messages](http://wiki.science.ru.nl/tfpie/images/6/6e/TFPIE16-slides-emachkasova.pdf)

## License

Copyright © 2017 Ben Brinckerhoff

Distributed under the Eclipse Public License version 1.0, just like Clojure.

Commit message:

Refactors to add support for s/assert

README.md, after:

# Expound

Expound formats `clojure.spec` errors in a way that is optimized for humans to read.

Expound is in alpha while `clojure.spec` is in alpha.

## Usage

[![Clojars Project](https://img.shields.io/clojars/v/expound.svg)](https://clojars.org/expound)

### `expound`

Replace calls to `clojure.spec.alpha/explain` with `expound.alpha/expound` and to `clojure.spec.alpha/explain-str` with `expound.alpha/expound-str`.

```clojure
(require '[clojure.spec.alpha :as s])
;; for clojurescript:
;; (require '[cljs.spec.alpha :as s])
(require '[expound.alpha :as expound])

(s/def :example.place/city string?)
(s/def :example.place/state string?)
(s/def :example/place (s/keys :req-un [:example.place/city :example.place/state]))

(s/explain :example/place {})
;; val: {} fails spec: :example/place predicate: (contains? % :city)
;; val: {} fails spec: :example/place predicate: (contains? % :state)
;; :clojure.spec.alpha/spec  :example/place
;; :clojure.spec.alpha/value  {}

(expound/expound :example/place {})
;; -- Spec failed --------------------

;;   {}

;; should contain keys: `:city`,`:state`

;; -- Relevant specs -------

;; :example/place:
;;   (clojure.spec.alpha/keys
;;    :req-un
;;    [:example.place/city :example.place/state])

;; -------------------------
;; Detected 1 error

(s/explain :example/place {:city "Denver", :state :CO})
;; In: [:state] val: :CO fails spec: :example.place/state at: [:state] predicate: string?
;; :clojure.spec.alpha/spec  :example/place
;; :clojure.spec.alpha/value  {:city "Denver", :state :CO}

(expound/expound :example/place {:city "Denver", :state :CO})
;; -- Spec failed --------------------

;;   {:city ..., :state :CO}
;;                      ^^^

;; should satisfy

;;   string?

;; -- Relevant specs -------

;; :example.place/state:
;;   clojure.core/string?
;; :example/place:
;;   (clojure.spec.alpha/keys
;;    :req-un
;;    [:example.place/city :example.place/state])

;; -------------------------
;; Detected 1 error
```

### `*explain-out*`

To use other Spec functions, you can set `clojure.spec.alpha/*explain-out*` (or `cljs.spec.alpha/*explain-out*`.

(Setting `*explain-out*` does not work correctly in Clojurescript versions prior to `1.9.562` due to differences in `explain-data`)

```clojure
;; Temporarily set the dynamic var
(require '[clojure.spec.alpha :as s])
;; for clojurescript:
;; (require '[cljs.spec.alpha :as s])
(require '[expound.alpha :as expound])

(s/def :example.place/city string?)

;;  Use s/assert
(s/check-asserts true) ; enable asserts

;; Set printer in the scope of 'binding'
(binding [s/*explain-out* printer]
  (s/assert :example.place/city 1))

;; Or set it globally
(set! s/*explain-out* printer)
(s/assert :example.place/city 1)
```

## Prior Art

* Error messages in [Elm](http://elm-lang.org/), in particular the [error messages catalog](https://github.com/elm-lang/error-message-catalog)
* Error messages in [Figwheel](https://github.com/bhauman/lein-figwheel), in particular the config error messages generated from [strictly-specking](https://github.com/bhauman/strictly-specking)
* [Clojure Error Message Catalog](https://github.com/yogthos/clojure-error-message-catalog)
* [The Usability of beginner-oriented Clojure error messages](http://wiki.science.ru.nl/tfpie/images/6/6e/TFPIE16-slides-emachkasova.pdf)

## License

Copyright © 2017 Ben Brinckerhoff

Distributed under the Eclipse Public License version 1.0, just like Clojure.
